---
title: PRELIMINARY Indirection
author: Teodor Heggelund
date: 2018-06-16
---

Each layer of indirection is a costly opportunity for growth.

By introducing indirection -- reference -- into the system, we add an axis of
flexibility. At the same time, each axis potentially multiplies the complexity
of the overall model.

All foundational learning predicates new layers of indirection, yet they are
severely costly to make.

The design of our cognitive layers of indirection has traditionally been the
responsibility of philosopher. Well, not really, but the design of the
description of our layers of indirection.

Layers of indirection can be essential to seeing truth, and concealing
falsehood. Thinking too abstractly about something can merely insulate from what
matters, whereas thinking locally about a global systemic problem makes us work
in the wrong direction.

My current best bet is working locally, aligned globally. Yeah, so this is
essentially just saying "do both". Take the responsibility of both attitudes.
That's potentially problematic. It can be hard. It does not give an easy path.
Yet, I have a hard time seeing that it can be the wrong path. It provides a
balance, an aim, a target so that one may start at the global or the local, and
even if the beginning is not optimal, the end may be. It provides a direction.

-----------------

Phenomenology is another layer of indirection, which applies to /everything/.
That's really costly!

-----------------

2018-08-28 addendum.

Is there a difference -- mathematically -- between a layer of indirection and a
boundary? Are those two not the same? And if so, when are they not the same? Is
there a counter-example?

I've recently been thinking a lot about boundaries. I even published a post
about it. /Negotiating boundaries/, that is. Is this really something else? Or
just the same in a different wrapping? I'm going to re-read the original, and
reconsider.
