---
title: Negotiating boundaries
author: Teodor Heggelund
date: 2018-05-26
---

Keywords: /philosophy/.

Lately, many of my trains of thought have ended up in a singular challenge: how
to negotiate boundaries. Successful political systems negotiate well between
conservatives wanting to maintain boundaries, and liberals wanting to remove
them. Successful programming languages design boundaries where they are useful
without being too much of a pain in the ass. Bad software systems have
tyrannical boundaries that they force you to abide by, whereas software without
boundaries are just a pile of code that no-one knows how to touch. Bad
management either stems from lack of boundaries or too much limitation. Good
management successfully creates stability /and/ opportunity.

In a sense, I could have said structure instead of boundaries. Structure is a
set of boundaries. Structure is classification. Instead of negotiating
boundaries, I could have said discussing the design of systems: where the
boundaries should be placed, and how many boundaries we need. [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dataism][Dataism]] as
described by Yuval Harari explains the world as an information-processing
system. What information processing is useful? The information processing that
helps us make sense of things. The organization of information. Whether it is
making the information available to a broader audience, or just improving the
organization of the information. Useful information processing is thus
successful negotiation of boundaries. And as we produce more information than
we remove, we need in sum to add more boundaries than we remove.
